# FISH 493 Capstone 1: Proposal

1 credit, graded     Instructor: Dr Greg Jensen, Capstone Advisor    Offered: Fall, Spring, even weeks      Website: The class has a dedicated Catalyst site {link from Greg}      Syllabus for Fish 493 can be found here {link to pdf of syllabus}       The aim of the Capstone Proposal writing class is to help you develop a research proposal that will be used as a framework for your research in subsequent quarters. Your actual proposal will be developed with your advisor – this class supports your efforts and provides additional support in your writing.Meeting times will be used to share your ideas with your colleagues and to develop your proposal. The first three weeks will be partly lecture-based, and will introduce you background necessary for proposal development. Each class has a task associated with it – you will be asked to contribute to the discussion board, upload files, or review your colleague’s work before the class meets. All classes will involve proposal discussion groups, where you will be encouraged to present your ideas to four or five of your peers. You will formally defend your research ideas in a short PowerPoint presentation in the last meeting. There are several important points that will help you succeed in this class:      •	Identify your research project early – at least in your junior year    •	Contact the capstone advisor, Dr Greg Jensen, and discuss with him your research ideas. He can help you identify faculty members and help find resources associated with your research     •	Keep in mind that research projects and faculty mentors are required before students can register for Fish 493.    •	The syllabus provides details of the format of the proposal      