**Learning goals**   The capstone integrates the SAFS degree learning goals. Specifically, students are encouraged to apply their knowledge to new situations, implement their research skills using ethical practice, communicate their findings through writing and oral presentations, and place their findings within scientific and social contexts.     Therefore, by conducting independent research, students will enhance their ability to;    •	Acquire and synthesize information relevant to their research, and  apply this knowledge to new situations    •	Communicate at an advanced level using writing and verbal skills    •	Apply the scientific method to novel questions through hypotheses  development, collection and interpretation of data, implementation of advanced quantitative skills, synthesis and reporting     •	Apply critical thinking, problem solving and ethical approaches to research   
 Capstones are individually mentored by faculty and SAFS-affiliated researchers.**Description of process**    Capstone students are guided throughout the process by a dedicated capstone advisor, a faculty mentor, and often, a work site mentor such as a graduate student or collaborating scientist in a government Agency. Research is conducted over a minimum of three quarters. There are three components to the project      
1.	Fish 493 Capstone I: Proposal (1 graded credit), guided by the capstone advisor. During this quarter, students prepare by identifying the research topic, meeting the faculty advisor, completing background reading, acquiring permits and writing their proposal. The latter has a clear outline and follows typical scientific format.     2.	Fish 494 Capstone 2: Research (3 credits); guided by the faculty mentor, involves field sampling and experimentation, laboratory experiments or database exploration (or a mixture of these activities).    3.	Fish 495 Capstone 3: Research Synthesis (3 credits. Final grade awarded to Fish 494 and 495, six credits total), guided by the faculty mentor. Results are analyzed and written as papers in the style of a peer-reviewed scientific journal with appropriate graphs and tables. Students also present their research formally in a scientific setting, such as the Mary Gates Undergraduate symposium, the SAFS undergraduate symposium, Agency seminars and professional scientific meetings.    
To sign up for capstone courses, contact the Capstone Coordinator (gjensen@uw.edu).